---
created: 2024-08-14
last updated: 2024-08-14
status: To be reviewed
reviewers:
  - ___
title: Copy Actions
authors:
  - Silic0nS0ldier
---


# Abstract

Copying of files and directories is a common need that is currently underserved in Bazel. This proposal seeks to make this a builtin capability to
improve performance and simplify rule development.

# Background

The following actions (`ctx.actions.*`) already exist;
- `args` - An abstraction for memory-efficient argument management. May produce a file.
- `declare_directory` - Declares a directory output.
- `declare_file` - Declares a file output.
- `declare_symlink` - Declares a symlink output.
- `do_nothing` - Does nothing, only serving as an insertion point for the deprecated 'extra actions' feature.
- `expand_template` - Creates a file using a template.
- `template_dict` - Abstraction for `expand_template` that allows deferring evaluation of values.
- `run` and `run_shell` - Runs an executable/shell script. May produce file(s), director(y/ies) and/or symlink(s).
- `symlink` - Creates a symlink.
- `write` - Creates a file.

The closest analogue builtin analogue to copying a file is currently using `ctx.actions.symlink`, which depending on the scenario can lead to different
behaviour at runtime (e.g. NodeJS import resolution is affected, and package managers like [pnpm](https://pnpm.io/) (including rulesets like
[Rules JS](https://github.com/aspect-build/rules_js)) rely on such behavioural differences). This makes for a poor subsitutite.

For a true file or directory copy, one of the following API surfaces must be used;
- `ctx.actions.run` or `ctx.actions.run_shell`.
- `genrule`

Some utility rulesets include their own implemenations using these API; 
- Skylib
  - [`copy_directory` rule](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-skylib/blob/5c071b5006bb9799981d04d74a28bdee2f000d4a/docs/copy_directory_doc.md).
  - [`copy_file` rule](https://github.com/bazelbuild/bazel-skylib/blob/5c071b5006bb9799981d04d74a28bdee2f000d4a/docs/copy_file_doc.md).
- Aspect's Bazel Helpers Library
  - [`copy_directory` rule and `copy_directory_action` action-generating function](https://github.com/aspect-build/bazel-lib/blob/5d09fc1b8352ef276dd4dd873b3dc5b0f5482f19/docs/copy_directory.md).
  - [`copy_file` rule and `copy_file_action` action-generating function](https://github.com/aspect-build/bazel-lib/blob/5d09fc1b8352ef276dd4dd873b3dc5b0f5482f19/docs/copy_file.md).
  - [`copy_to_bin` rule, `copy_file_to_bin_action` action-generating function and `copy_files_to_bin_actions` action-generating function](https://github.com/aspect-build/bazel-lib/blob/5d09fc1b8352ef276dd4dd873b3dc5b0f5482f19/docs/copy_to_bin.md)
  - [`copy_to_directory` rule and `copy_to_directory_bin_action` action-generating function](https://github.com/aspect-build/bazel-lib/blob/5d09fc1b8352ef276dd4dd873b3dc5b0f5482f19/docs/copy_to_directory.md)

Because all of these implementations rely on a spawn, they inherit associated weaknesses including;
- Overhead of spawn is disproportionately large relative to the task. This is even worse in conjunction with remote execution.
- Increases size (and potentially volume) of merkle trees, increasing CPU and memory requirements of Bazel.
- Attempts to optimise for remote execution by forcing copy-related spawns to run locally suffers from caching issues...
  - ...in scenarios where clients are forbidden from uploading `ActionResult` metadata (listed outputs can be arbitrary, representing a security issue).
  - ...when copying files generated by the remote as they must be downloaded first.
- Implementation changes can lead to cache misses.
- If copies are batched, odds are in most runs only 1 input will have actually changed (doing more work than necessary, becomes a performance and efficency concern once the batch hits a certain size).

# Proposal

Introduce 3 new functions to `ctx.actions`.
- `copyFile` - Copies a single file.
- `copyDirectory` - Copies a single directory.
- `copySymlink` - Copies a single symlink.

These copy actions should;
- Not produce an `ActionResult`.
- Not require downloading from the remote when using remote execution.
- Produce an output with the exact same hash as their input.

# Backward-compatibility

This proposal won't impact backward compatibility, although feature detection should be considered so that existing utility rulesets can optionally use the newer (and more efficent) API without needing to wait for supported Bazel versions to age out of the support matrix.
